[DOC-1331] YugabyteDB Psycopg3 Smart Driver for YSQL (#31913)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/stable/develop/drivers-orms/python/yugabyte-psycopg3.md

      PG Psycopg3
    </a>
  </li>
  <li >
    <a href="../aiopg" class="nav-link">
      <i class="icon-postgres" aria-hidden="true"></i>
      aiopg
    </a>
  </li>
</ul>

The [Yugabyte Psycopg 3 smart driver](https://pypi.org/project/psycopg-yugabytedb/) is a Python driver for [YSQL](/stable/api/ysql/) built on the [PostgreSQL Psycopg 3 driver](https://github.com/psycopg/psycopg2), with additional [connection load balancing](/stable/develop/drivers-orms/smart-drivers/) features. The import name is `psycopg`, so no changes are needed on existing application code; opting in requires a single parameter on the connection string.

This guide uses YSQL with the YugabyteDB Psycopg 3 smart driver.

## CRUD operations

The following sections demonstrate how to perform common tasks required for Python application development using the YugabyteDB Psycopg 3 smart driver.

To start building your application, make sure you have met the [prerequisites](../#prerequisites).

### Step 1: Add the YugabyteDB driver dependency

The fork is published as a pre-release on PyPI. Install with `--pre` or pin the exact version:

```sh
pip install --pre psycopg-yugabytedb

> # or

Reviewer: Same as above

| port | Listen port for YSQL. | 5433 |
| dbname | Database name | yugabyte |
| user | User connecting to the database | yugabyte |
| password | User password | yugabyte |
| load_balance_hosts | Enables [uniform load balancing](../../smart-drivers/#cluster-aware-load-balancing). Set to `true` to use the smart driver. | false |
| topology_keys | Enables [topology-aware load balancing](../../smart-drivers/#topology-aware-load-balancing). Comma-separated placements as `cloud.region.zone` (use `*` for any zone in that cloud/region). Ignored if `load_balance_hosts` is `false`. | none |
| yb_servers_refresh_interval | How often the driver re-queries `yb_servers()` to pick up topology changes. Clamped to [0, 600]. | 300 |
| failed_host_reconnect_delay_secs | After a failed connect to a TServer, how long the driver quarantines that host before reconsidering it. Clamped to [0, 60]. | 5 |

The following is an example connection string:

```python
import psycopg

conn = psycopg.connect(
"host=h1,h2,h3 port=5433 user=yugabyte dbname=yugabyte "
"load_balance_hosts=true"
)
```

You can also pass the parameters as keyword arguments to `psycopg.connect`:

```python

> conn = psycopg.connect(host="h1,h2,h3", port=5433, user="yugabyte", dbname="yugabyte", load_balance_hosts="true")

Reviewer: Can we only have one host here since we are anyway adding a multiple host connection section.

      PG Psycopg3
    </a>
  </li>
  <li >
    <a href="../aiopg" class="nav-link">
      <i class="icon-postgres" aria-hidden="true"></i>
      aiopg
    </a>
  </li>
</ul>

The [Yugabyte Psycopg 3 smart driver](https://pypi.org/project/psycopg-yugabytedb/) is a Python driver for [YSQL](/stable/api/ysql/) built on the [PostgreSQL Psycopg 3 driver](https://github.com/psycopg/psycopg2), with additional [connection load balancing](/stable/develop/drivers-orms/smart-drivers/) features. The import name is `psycopg`, so no changes are needed on existing application code; opting in requires a single parameter on the connection string.

This guide uses YSQL with the YugabyteDB Psycopg 3 smart driver.

## CRUD operations

The following sections demonstrate how to perform common tasks required for Python application development using the YugabyteDB Psycopg 3 smart driver.

To start building your application, make sure you have met the [prerequisites](../#prerequisites).

### Step 1: Add the YugabyteDB driver dependency

The fork is published as a pre-release on PyPI. Install with `--pre` or pin the exact version:

```sh
pip install --pre psycopg-yugabytedb
# or

> pip install "psycopg-yugabytedb==3.3.4.1rc1"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
pip install "psycopg-yugabytedb==3.3.4.1"
```

  - macOS: `brew install libpq && brew link --force libpq`
  - Ubuntu / Debian: `sudo apt install libpq5`
  - RHEL / Fedora: `sudo dnf install libpq`

{{< note title="Coexistence with upstream psycopg" >}}

When you install `psycopg-yugabytedb` from PyPI, your code still uses `import psycopg` — the same module name as [upstream Psycopg 3](https://www.psycopg.org/psycopg3/). Both packages install into the same directory (`site-packages/psycopg/`), so pip cannot install them side by side. If either package is already present, uninstall it first, or use a dedicated virtual environment:

| PyPI package (install with pip) | Import in application code |
| :------------------------------ | :------------------------- |
| `psycopg-yugabytedb` | `import psycopg` (Yugabyte smart driver) |
| `psycopg`, `psycopg-binary`, or `psycopg-c` | `import psycopg` (upstream only) |

```sh
python3 -m venv ~/yb-venv
~/yb-venv/bin/pip install --pre psycopg-yugabytedb
```

{{< /note >}}

Verify the install:

```sh
python -c "import psycopg; print(psycopg.__version__)"

> # Expected: 3.3.4.1rc1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Expected: 3.3.4.1
```

print("Query returned: %s, %s, %s" % (row[0], row[1], row[2]))

# Commit and close down.

conn.commit()
cur.close()
conn.close()
```

## Run the application

Run the project `QuickStartApp.py` using the following command:

```python
python3 QuickStartApp.py
```

You should see output similar to the following:

```text
Created table employee
Inserted (id, name, age, language) = (1, 'John', 35, 'Python')
Query returned: John, 35, Python
```

If the connection fails, verify:

- YugabyteDB is running and reachable on the host/port in your DSN.
- The yugabyte user (or whichever user you used) exists and has the necessary permissions.
- For multi-host DSNs, at least one contact host responds.
- System libpq is installed (see [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)).

## Limitations

- Currently, [PostgreSQL psycopg 3 driver](https://github.com/psycopg/psycopg) and [YugabyteDB psycopg 3 smart driver](https://github.com/yugabyte/psycopg) _cannot_ be used in the same environment. Both write to `site-packages/psycopg/`. If a previous environment has upstream psycopg (or psycopg-binary, psycopg-c) installed, uninstall it before installing the fork, or use a fresh virtual environment.

> - The driver is a pre-release (3.3.4.1rc1); install with `--pre` or pin the exact version.

Reviewer 2: We can remove the line now since 3.3.4.1 is released

menu:
  stable_develop:
    identifier: yugabyte-psycopg3-driver
    parent: python-drivers
    weight: 505
rightNav:
  hideH4: true
type: docs
---

<ul class="nav nav-tabs-alt nav-tabs-yb">
  <li class="active">
    <a href="../yugabyte-psycopg3/" class="nav-link">
      YSQL
    </a>
  </li>
  <li>
    <a href="../ycql/" class="nav-link">
      YCQL
    </a>
  </li>
</ul>

<ul class="nav nav-tabs-alt nav-tabs-yb">
  <li >
    <a href="../yugabyte-psycopg2" class="nav-link">
      <img src="/icons/yugabyte.svg" /i>
      Yugabyte Psycopg2
    </a>
  </li>
  <li >
    <a href="../yugabyte-psycopg3" class="nav-link active">
      <img src="/icons/yugabyte.svg" /i>
      Yugabyte Psycopg3
    </a>
  </li>
  <li >
    <a href="../postgres-psycopg2" class="nav-link">
      <i class="icon-postgres" aria-hidden="true"></i>
      PG Psycopg2
    </a>
  </li>
  <li >
    <a href="../postgres-psycopg3" class="nav-link">
      <i class="icon-postgres" aria-hidden="true"></i>
      PG Psycopg3
    </a>
  </li>
  <li >
    <a href="../aiopg" class="nav-link">
      <i class="icon-postgres" aria-hidden="true"></i>
      aiopg
    </a>
  </li>
</ul>

> [YugabyteDB psycopg-yugabytedb](https://pypi.org/project/psycopg-yugabytedb/) is a [smart driver](../../smart-drivers/) fork of [psycopg 3](https://www.psycopg.org/psycopg3/) for YugabyteDB. It extends upstream psycopg 3 with cluster-aware and topology-aware connection load balancing. The import name stays `psycopg`, so existing application code is unchanged (opting in is a single parameter on the connection string).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The [Yugabyte Psycopg3 smart driver](https://pypi.org/project/psycopg-yugabytedb/) is a Python driver for [YSQL](/stable/api/ysql/) built on the [PostgreSQL Psycopg 3 driver](https://github.com/psycopg/psycopg2), with additional [connection load balancing](/stable/develop/drivers-orms/smart-drivers/) features. The import name is `psycopg`, so no changes are needed on existing application code; opting in requires a single parameter on the connection string.
```

> This guide uses YSQL with the YugabyteDB psycopg 3 smart driver.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This guide uses YSQL with the YugabyteDB Psycopg3 smart driver.
```

> This guide uses YSQL with the YugabyteDB psycopg 3 smart driver.

Reviewer 3: When using the name let's standardize on this; the upstream driver is apparently "Psycopg 3"

```

{{< /note >}}

Verify the install:

```sh
python -c "import psycopg; print(psycopg.__version__)"
# Expected: 3.3.4.1rc1

python -c "from psycopg.yb.registry import ClusterRegistry; print('smart driver ok')"
# Expected: smart driver ok
```

### Step 2: Set up the database connection

To enable smart-driver load balancing, add `load_balance_hosts=true` to your connection string (or pass `load_balance_hosts="true"` to `psycopg.connect()`). If you omit it, the driver behaves like upstream psycopg 3.

The smart driver extends the libpq conninfo string with four parameters. All take the standard libpq `key=value` form, and both dashed (`load-balance-hosts`) and underscore forms are accepted.

The following table describes the connection parameters required to connect, including [smart driver parameters](../../smart-drivers/) for uniform and topology load balancing.

| Parameter | Description | Default |
| :-------- | :---------- | :------ |
| host | Comma-separated hostnames or IPs. One contact host is enough to bootstrap. The rest of the cluster is discovered via `yb_servers()`. Multiple hosts add robustness if the first contact is down. | localhost |

> | port | Listen port for YSQL. YugabyteDB default is 5433. | 5432 |

Reviewer 3: shouldn't default be 5433? and why is the default also in the description?

| dbname | Database name | yugabyte |
| user | User connecting to the database | yugabyte |
| password | User password | yugabyte |

> | load_balance_hosts | Enables [uniform load balancing](../../smart-drivers/#cluster-aware-load-balancing). Set to `true` to use the smart driver. | false |

Reviewer 3: this driver uniquely uses 'load_balance_hosts'? different from psycopg2?

Author: yes looks like. cc @Sfurti-yb - its not load_balance?

Reviewer: Yes, this is because it modifies the upstream driver's load_balance_hosts property, similar to the npgsql smart driver.

| topology_keys | Enables [topology-aware load balancing](../../smart-drivers/#topology-aware-load-balancing). Comma-separated placements as `cloud.region.zone` (use `*` for any zone in that cloud/region). Ignored if `load_balance_hosts` is `false`. | none |
| yb_servers_refresh_interval | How often the driver re-queries `yb_servers()` to pick up topology changes. Clamped to [0, 600]. | 300 |

> | failed_host_reconnect_delay_secs | After a failed connect to a TServer, how long the driver quarantines that host before reconsidering it. Clamped to [0, 60]. | 5 |

Reviewer 3: Again why a different name from 2 driver? Also I think 2 has a better description.
what is "clamped"?

Author: cc @Sfurti-yb

Reviewer: This is based off of the latest java driver, psycopg2 is still on the old variable name.

> The following is an example connection string:

Reviewer 3: Format on 2 page is nicer

```python
"host=127.0.0.1 port=5433 user=yugabyte dbname=yugabyte load_balance_hosts=true"
```

You can also pass the parameters as keyword arguments to `psycopg.connect`:

```python
conn = psycopg.connect(
    host="127.0.0.1",
    port=5433,
    user="yugabyte",
    dbname="yugabyte",
    load_balance_hosts="true",
)
```

After the driver establishes the initial connection, it fetches the list of available servers from the cluster, and load-balances subsequent connection requests across these servers.

#### Use multiple addresses

You can specify multiple hosts in the connection string to provide alternative options during the initial connection in case the primary address fails.

{{< tip title="Tip">}}

> To obtain a list of available hosts, you can connect to any cluster node and use the `yb_servers()` YSQL function.

Reviewer 3: Actually "YSQL yb_servers() function" would make more sense

{{< /note >}}

## CRUD operations

The following sections demonstrate how to perform common tasks required for Python application development using the Yugabyte Psycopg 3 smart driver.

To start building your application, make sure you have met the [prerequisites](../#prerequisites).

### Step 1: Add the YugabyteDB driver dependency

Install `psycopg-yugabytedb` from PyPI with pip, or pin the exact version:

```sh
pip install psycopg-yugabytedb
# or
pip install "psycopg-yugabytedb==3.3.4.1"
```

To use the upstream connection pool alongside the smart driver, install the `[pool]` extra. This pulls in an unmodified upstream `psycopg-pool`; the pool's connections still go through the smart-driver dispatcher.

```sh

> pip install --pre "psycopg-yugabytedb[pool]"

Reviewer: No --pre required anymore, GA has been published
